# Automation against humanity

Stress. Anxiety. Anger. Frustration. None of these words should be associated with a shopping experience. Still, when the COVID-19 pandemic started, several supply chains were affected, causing high demand and low stock for electronics, food, and general household goods worldwide. From toilet paper to flour to video games and N95 masks - at traditional brick and mortar stores as well as e-commerce, it was a real challenge to stock up for the months full of unknowns ahead of us.

Talking about videogames more specifically, during the first weeks of March 2020, the demand for a Nintendo Switch fitness game called Ring Fit Adventure was so high in countries already under shelter-in-place orders that it went out of stock globally. Getting out of the door to exercise was not going to be possible until further notice, and people who wanted a copy of the game were out of luck unless they paid two or three times over retail price for one. It took several months for additional units to become available, and only over one year after the pandemic started, some stores marked down the game's price as the interest - and the sense of necessity - faded away.

Fast forward a few months, in November 2020, the Sony PlayStation 5 and the Microsoft Xbox One Series consoles launched, but getting ahold of them was, again, almost as hard as finding water in the desert. Gamers, who were still under the shelter-in-place orders, were desperate to buy their units, but something interesting and unfortunate prevented them from ordering them.

Scalpers identified a good oportunity to profit with these highly anticipated videogame consoles and used specialized bots to secure multiple units before legitimate customers could have a chance to buy one. Some bots were built using popular UI automation libraries well known in the software industry. Others had direct access to APIs provided by retailers to third-party sellers, which enabled them to detect when new stock was available and allowed them to place an order before the items showed up on the storefronts.

The extra traffic and load generated by the bots caused massive outages. Retailers had to develop mechanisms to slow down the bots or completely prevent them from working. These new security measures included virtual queues, extra CAPTCHA challenges, and lottery systems, each with their pros and cons and possibly different ways to be defeated.

This cat-and-mouse game is not new. A quick search can reveal several websites offering automation services for online stores. Being at home for so long definetly contributed to the growth and success of this kind of service. By the end of December, scalpers had [made over $28M](https://www.tomshardware.com/news/analysis-of-scalping-Q4-2020) from reselling more than 60,000 video game consoles on eBay alone with profits ranging from 150% to 350% over the original retail prices.

Back to the pandemic, as of writing this chapter, there is no global vaccine rollout yet. While some systems are available to schedule an appointment, they are still only available to priority groups. News outlets already [report](https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/security/want-vaccination-appointment-helps-know-python-programmer-rcna457) that people who know how to program are using their skills to scrape appointment websites and notify their family members when a slot is available. There are no reports yet of appointments being sold through these particular means, but skipping the line is undoubtedly happening in some places.

So, where does one draw the line when using technology? Would you use your skills to your advantage in similar contexts? Some of the goals of automation are to reduce repetitive work and do things at scale. However, when there is an unfair advantage over people who do not have the skills to code or the budget to order a bot, this may become an ethical issue - or perhaps a forcing function to get more people into programming.

At the end of the day, software is here to solve people's problems. However, we should not solve a problem by creating new ones - by making the shopping experience harder for the bots, we ended up making it harder for everyone.
